# bk
I’m not sure where to start. Maybe at the beginning. The beginning, I think, was the day I got my ass kicked, and then I was taken to the station. It wasn’t the first time it happened to me, of course. But it had been a while since I had been caught. And this time, it was different. First, because it was the day Jack took interest in me. Second, it wasn't simply graffiti. It was a commission. This arrest was going to screw up my business. I’d found myself getting paid to vandalize blinds or whatever. Some guys, contractors, were spreading the word. They’d contact me and ask me to go and break down the blinds of the competition—his car, his house. It was all by word of mouth. The last customer couldn’t help but tell the next one his story. It must have made them laugh. It must have turned them on to death, in fact. It was completely illegal and unfair. It was raw cowardice. That’s what they liked about it.
So, I met one of these gentlemen. We had coffee. He gave me a Google location with the picture and everything. I would ask if there was a specific date for the operation. Often, there was: the guy made sure I did my operation the day before vacations or at Christmas, just to properly spoil the other one and ensure that the owner wasn't present. Anyway, I was always hatching the plan a little in advance. Some people would ask me to write specific messages, threatening stuff, but I would either avoid it or charge more. Most of the time, I would just tag randomly. Or I would make up some kind of gang war that happened during the night, one city against another, and even fachos and gauchos fighting in the poor shopkeeper’s front. I had a knack for storytelling. I was into the flowing, the uncontrolled with different writings, a bomb in each hand to imitate the writing of a third party and to go faster.
I always had trouble motivating myself to go out in the middle of the night, and eventually it filled me with a childish satisfaction when I was done. Always.
I proposed stupid slogans like "We'll come back," "I love your wife," and "I'll have your skin, my bastard!" for the threats, all in an assassine, spidery, psychotic style with difficult-to-appreciate colors, irritating pigments, dark and shrill at the same time, and other of the most beautiful effects. I forbade myself racial insults, of course.
I had charged two hundred euros for my first mandated act of vandalism. Very quickly, I went up to five hundred, eight hundred, and sometimes a thousand or two. Not more... It was the best job in the world. I went out three times a month at most, and that was enough to make a salary. Once the order was done, I showed the pictures. The guys were thrilled. They were interested in me, and they paid me for my work. They ordered paintings for their homes. To get closer, they mimicked my suburban accent; friendly mimicry. In return, I borrowed the character of a mute bad boy. It allowed me to put a little distance between myself and them, and they must have liked that. It was their romantic vision of the banlieue. My success was assured by the rarity of the service. I was, and still am, the only oddball who was a self-proclaimed professional vandal; in short, counter-street marketing.
The idea did not come from me. I was making decorations for the tradesmen's store blinds. I would paint their logos on their storefronts, as well as scenes and graffiti that were a little kitschy on the signs that drew customers in. It put butter in the spinach, and it paid for my painting. I went to do the front of this guy who had a driver’s license point recovery business. I finished his ugly blind there and found my gold mine. The guy had trouble paying me. Maybe he thought it was ugly too, what I had done. But his polluted blindness was not a great support either. Now he tells me that he is the most unhappy man in the world, that life is unkind to his kind, that he can't sleep, that he wants to retaliate against his former partners who have abandoned him—«They left with my clientele and my ideas»—and all that nonsense. I’m supposed to understand him. I’m supposed to bail him out.
How much for tags?
-Two hundred.
Okay, but you’re getting it everywhere, right? I want it to be gross. Don’t forget the windows on the sides and everything.
Yeah, no problem. I can even throw acid on his windows, so he has to change them. It’s expensive. - Yes, that’s right.
The guy, when I showed him the pictures, said it was the best day of his life. I felt like I was his Zorro. Anyway, he started talking to me after that. He relaxed. He was talking to me about art and literature. He had culture, in fact, and I would say taste. He gave me two tickets for the art fair at the Carreaux du Temple. A gift. And with that, he told me to stick around; he wanted to commission a painting for his wife. I said to myself, "There is good business. The lowest human feeling is the only inexhaustible resource; that’s the key to neo-liberalism.
For those who wanted to declare the pay, I would charge them a silkscreen print as a work of art that would then be deducted from their taxes. The system was well established. It was too good to continue. Maybe I wasn’t worrying enough. I was taking it lightly and wasn’t specifically organized. I started to stress out only when I got out. Investigations seemed difficult because I was always signing different names in different styles. It would all be drowned out by the Parisian vandalism.
I never really knew why I got caught. I guess the owner forgot his keys or something; a neighbor told him, and he was not far away. It happens. But I had been waiting. I was waiting in my 206, dabbling in the smell of fake leather and cold cigarettes. I dozed off. I dreamed I was at the beach on an island with a beautiful woman and a guy.
signs. It was like a flash. To the left of the blind was a CCTV camera. I covered my face with a plaid scarf, a gift from my mother. I put my phone in the car. I slid the car keys over the rim. I don’t like to have my car keys without my car, but when you’re getting squeezed, it’s better to say you’re on foot. I’d pull up one leg of my jog to serve up a bit of the shot they’d expect, the ones who’d watch the camera tape later. Hood. I’d put on my headphones. The truth is, I get stressed when I paint. So I’d rather give myself a time limit and listen to music than threaten my concentration with every passing car. If the cops happen to drive by, I consider it bad luck and just deal with it. There’s often no point in running or doing anything. But you have to give yourself a very strict time limit, run headlong, and then run again. I keep stats. I start the stopwatch. It’s a lot of fun.
That’s why I didn’t hear them coming. I was doing abstract doodles with Stress in my ears to give me like an adrenaline shot. It was really just destruction. I was marking PSGs and OMs that were getting in each other’s way to look pretty. The sound of a click, a shadow in the corner of my eye, a fresh wind, and Pam! The nuisiers' handcuffs were pushing my earphone into my eardrum and crushing my cheekbone. My ear was digging deeper into my skull. My cranium crossed the space in an elegant arc and hit the asphalt, which was not going anywhere. The impact was violent. I felt it strongly.
On the floor, I was taking out one earphone. The other was grabbing my collar. Two pieces of information were hitting my brain before his series of fists. My grandmother melted her gold teeth and pulled out that chain I’d been wearing since I was eighteen. I felt she had cracked. There was no way I was going to lose it. It had to be slipping somewhere in my shirt. Then the bastard had to touch the music. He inadvertently changed it to "funk. Labi Siffre, to be exact.
That was it. He would call me names like "Huh, you little son of a bitch," and I would say "Fuck your mother" in thin air. The guy was so excited that he went to get his scooter. I watched him roll the scooter chain around his fist as I retrieved my gold chain and slipped it into my pocket, only to be held at gunpoint by his hands on my wrists and his knees on my muffled thorax.
It was perhaps the only time in my life that I was happy to have my face imprinted with the blue rhythm of the arriving cops. It stopped the beating. Otherwise, the face... Gone...
I got picked up. With the cops, you have to be cool when the team arrests you and super annoying when you’ve passed the comic book doors. I used to do the opposite. It didn’t work at all. They think you’re a nice guy, so you’re naive, so you’re impressionable, so you get twice the price when you’re arrested. That’s the chicken’s motor; they play with the weak and crush any kind of threat... Just like real chickens... In this case, they were nice, so I wasn’t overdoing it. My head was sufficiently swollen that they didn’t want to overdo it. We went to the hospital for a quick check-up and a dressing before going to the deposition.
The first form, I filled it out handcuffed to the radiator, next to two guys who had decided to play the most annoying guys in the world. They understood the game.
«- Your name, surname, birthdate, address,...» says the cop.
Dominique Lefèvre,...
"Dominique, I’ll fuck you," says one of the guys. -Ahaaah. That’s the first time I’ve heard that one. - I’m just kidding, don’t cry, ech’. What are you here for? Are you shitting yourself or what? What time is it? Hey, what time is it? I spit on you, you little bitch. Answer me! We’ll wait for you at the exit tomorrow. We’re going to fuck you up even more than you already did, whore. That you’re a whore...
The cop finally deigned to take me to the drunk tank. Before that, they made me go through the toilet so that I would show my bullet hole, saying that I could have hidden a naked weapon or maybe some dignity. The drunk tank is always a sordid place. It looks like solitary confinement. That’s to give you a taste. There was a dim light. The frosted windows showed nothing. The prickly blanket held back the ten sheaves of bums that made it a real G.A.V. blanket. With my shoelaces confiscated, I still had a hood and arms to cross to get some sleep. I was thinking about the movie I had started at home and was still running. I had to get home as soon as possible. A cop would come by to wake me up every time he saw me wobble. He would come by and tell me to stay ready for the deposition, which would come much later, of course. So I would play games. I would tell myself stories to pass the time. Man is still an animal, isn’t he? Lock him up, and his whole body oozes wet fox. You had to do your best not to go crazy.
Finally, I passed for the deposition. It must have been five o’clock. Maybe six. I was purposely screwing up my fingerprinting to save time and provide my pupils with the maximum amount of stimulus.
A second cop asked me if I wanted to give my DNA to facilitate my registration. A second cop asked me if I would give my DNA to make it easier for me to be registered. So, no. I don’t want to. When I refused, he explained with notorious subtlety that it was a scientific process that left no room for error. I continued to refuse.
Then, it is necessary to start a legal procedure to...
Yeah, yeah, I get it. Okay. Let’s go.
We scratched the inside of my mouth, and I moved to the typewriter—well, the computer and the commissioner that goes with it. We rehearsed the sequence of actions as if it were a play, to see if I had any holes in my text, problems with my ellipses, or mouse holes for him to play cat. We began the session with a briefing on the context and the plot.
«-Hello artist! So... We looked at your file. It’s... I didn’t tell you to sit down! ... Sit down. Okay. It was more beautiful what you were doing before, there. What happened? What’s the project here with the doodles? Are you more PSG or OM? We didn’t get the message. Still an art student?
-No. I’m working now.
-Aaah. Well, you see! You are a champion! You missed your studies by playing the scum. Serves you right. I’m going to do everything I can to get the D.A. to kick your ass. I’m going to get you for drunken brawling in a public place and contempt of court. all of it! Just sign the damn rag and get out.
I was pretty sure that the judge or mediator wouldn’t be that hard. It was just a matter of not letting him know that it was mercenary work. As for the rest, the proprio had little chance of pressing charges without me pressing charges in return for assault and battery—not to mention all the procedural flaws that I could have slipped in on the day of the interview.
The commissioner stepped forward and said, "Hey. By the way, the owner is an old friend of ours. Oops. Ahahah». I winced, "Merde!"
They kept me awake by promising me breakfast—small butter cakes I never saw coming. I went out under the inexhaustible philosophies of the couil-lon, lieutenant A. D. N. around noon.
«-You’ll know to stay home and watch TV again.» He summed it up. When you don’t work, you have to stay home, watch TV, and drink if that’s not enough. But that’s it. These are the limits of freedom. Only freedom under control is allowed. Freedom has a place and a time. I was dreaming of a shower to wash away the sticky smell of the garlic. The idea of going to get the car knocked me out. My wounds were reawakening. I thought about the threats of the two jokers from the day before because a guy was looking at me from the opposite sidewalk. Maybe I was paranoid, with all the mental fatigue that was overwhelming me. Maybe not. I thought they had something else to do, though. I was going to the left when he came towards me. I thought he was giving me a friendly wave.
«-Wait.»
The tall blond guy with the perfect hair approached. He probably wanted to confront the freshness of his multiple shampoos, softeners, and other aftershaves with the stench of my soul. I wonder if the bad smells are stronger than the good ones or if it’s the other way around. Maybe they mix or slide together like water and oil.
"It’s you, Domi, isn’t it?"
That was my graffiti blaze. Dominique or Domi, simply. It was funny because it was ridiculous for a guy my age. I always liked nice, simple blazes for graffiti artists, like Kikil or Mr. Bibi. This name came from my great uncle, a funny bird if there ever was one. Dominique D'Hôtel, foundling in front of a hotel in the Saint-Ouen flea market He committed a murder at the age of twelve. He explained that he could not stand rum. It made him nervous. A protective brother took the rap for him. He turned himself in for him, but the judge, not serene, sent him to juvenile detention anyway, behind the high walls. It kept him away from the gambling and the bento, but not from the rum. When he came of age, they drafted him for the bat’d’af’. He came back from the merry-go-round loaded with tattoos. Child of Misfortune, engraved on his chest, was the first piece of a set that told his life story. The uncle was called Dodo the Tattooed when he came back from the second war and started a career of theft and front-wheel drive pimping and of course much more.
After my first arrest, I reversed the letters. I switched to Modi. I had taken a stepsion for Modigliani, the perfect cursed artist of Paris Montmartre. What could be more romantic? I admired his alcoholic shadow hovering over his resolutely mystical paintings. His cariatids appropriated the primitive arts in a complicated opening onto a new and ancient world, with one eye observing reality and the other turned inward to better reflect it. It took us out of our colonialist culture. Modigliani, the unbearable heaviness of the genius who sacrifices himself for the advancement of his society His sensitivity was his cross.
"Curse"​ is a powerful word. It evokes witches, vampires, mummies, and all the monsters on the fringe of the Christian world. All it takes is one verb badly said in a language that forks so that the fate is thrown, as in life, where the destinies are worked out of the thrown words. The future of Oedipus, played out long before his birth, is but an echo of all our lives. Just like monsters, snakes, scapegoats, the cursed heroes that we are must accept their destinies or it is the society of Thebes, our whole society that spoils. I mean, from the first word, it’s crazy to see all the tragedies that get tangled and untangled with the good and bad words spoken at a given moment. Modigliani understood something about the cursed hero's relationship with the past and future of a half-finished life, and the impact on his people, trapped in a cycle, a cycle for each of us and a cycle for everyone. The stories always repeat themselves. Is it to give someone the opportunity to find the right words at the right time? In my quest for the graffiti experience, I wrote these spoken words over and over on the walls.
I refused the outstretched hand.
«-Hello. My name is Jack. from Jack and Amer. Can I buy you a coffee?
I wondered if I was hallucinating. Jack and Amer were the most famous guys in the area when I started graffiti, but after that, we didn’t talk about them anymore.
«-Eh... No. As you can see, you’re picking me up at the wrong time. I’ve got a lot of stuff to do. I’m gonna
Start by getting some rest. I didn’t sleep very well, you know? Have we met before? What the hell are you doing here anyway? Are you from the police? (I knew a graffiti artist who became a Ratp controller, so you never know.)
I know it might seem strange for me to approach you now like this... You tagged a friend’s blind last night. He told me about it so I could find you.
- Yeah. Your cop buddy Great. So what do we do? You gonna fix my face, too?»
He raised his eyebrows like the guy who means you no harm, and with one hand raised like Buddha on his best day, I was the opposite. I was trying to put on airs, but I could feel that it wasn’t scary at all. I must have had one percent of my energy available in my body, and he was two heads taller than me, which is common. I’m short, so most people on this earth are two heads taller than me.
«-No, listen. I don’t really care about your blindness. I can handle that business, for that matter; it’s not a problem. I’m here as a headhunter on my own behalf. I’d like you to work for us.
How do you know who I am? And how did you find me? And why are you recruiting right out of the gardav’?»
My suspicion seemed to relax and even amuse him. «- I looked at the surveillance footage. We couldn’t see you, and anyway, I don’t know your face. But you’re the only graffiti artist in the area with a reputation for being ambidextrous. It’s true that I had made little videos where you could see me doing my outlines with both hands. I found this technique to go faster, and it was pretty choreographed, so I asked a buddy to come and film me in action. It only got about a hundred views on YouTube. I didn’t think it was enough to make a name for myself. And at the same time, life in the neighborhood is small.
«-I’m not really ambidextrous, I said.
I went to the surrounding police stations, asking for my nephew, who had been caught for vandalism during the night. Here, they told me I had to wait outside for your release. And here I am.
Cops don’t really care about procedures.
Since I was slow on the uptake, he went on: "Here’s my card. Call me later when you’re rested. We’re a small communications agency. We’re hiring graffiti artists. Promise me you’ll come in for an interview. If you do, I’ll fix your story from last night. I simply asked my friend not to press charges or try to find you. Does that work? I slipped the card into my pocket and walked away. I wanted to say goodbye but said, "We’ll see. The sun was irritating me, and I still didn’t know how to take this guy’s unexpected intervention.
I could have killed like the other one there, in the Stranger. The stench makes you hot and crazy. But animals don’t wash themselves, and they don’t kill for anything. Who knows why we humans can’t stand it?
I retrieved my car, which had already had time to get a ticket, and drove vaguely home to end the torture of that shitty night. I was happy to see my apartment again. I got my shower as a fountain of ambroy. I slept to complete my baptism and ate in front of the TV to regain the holy innocence that belongs to every man. Hallelujah. A t first I wanted to burn my clothes because they stank so much, but I gave them a second chance. I bought the jeans not even six months ago. In his back pocket, there was the card. White, eight centimeters by five five, a cheap pa- pier, no more than a hundred grams and letters scattered on it, no name, no other info. It was probably a game. I’d seen these before, the mystery cards. A friend, a graphic designer, had put his phone number on his card so that when they were linked together, they formed the last number. He stopped because no one would call him. This one was similar. Graffiti artists like to play games. It’s a known fact. The card had scattered letters.
Jack and Amer were of that generation where blazes were American-oriented, so they were four years above me, I would say. Those two made a quick breakthrough. I was a fan. They were posing enormously. They attacked through the Saint Lazare lanes. At a time when everyone was painting with chrome and black spray paint, they were rolling their backgrounds in color. Roller paint has good coverage. The walls of the Saint-Laz line are often quite wet and absorb graffiti quickly. Today, you can still see their pieces as if they were done the day before. They were the first to use one shade in a can of white paint. They'd go over the outlines with the same color, but often a darker shade, tone on tone. More rarely, they combined classics such as a white background with a red outline, a black background with a white outline, or a yellow background with a black outline. They systematically put their names together. Only once or twice did I see their names separated. They had adopted a common style—very typographic and very impactful. The 3Ds were always on the bottom right of the overlay, with the two names separated by a logo. The first series had the letter H, which was the logo of Jack Hammer, a Marvel Comics supervillain. The character appeared in Dare Devil for the first time anyway. He could break walls with his jackhammer gloves. quite a story. So the H was the name of their crew. It was a reference to Jack Hammer’s gang, The Hydra. The Hydra was a secret society of villains in the comics; the classic laboratory of Nazi scientists who created monsters to annoy the Americans. Hydra’s symbol is, of course, the Hydra from Greek mythology.
«Cut off the head of the hydra and a second one will grow» was the motto of these fictional terrorists. It was perfect. The H connected the duo as if they were from the same body. After that, all they had to do was stick stickers on the letter, and everyone knew it was them. Classy. Efficient. Sometimes they allowed themselves a few variations. When they made trains, for example, I once saw a huge dark green jungle-like block with a fluorescent green outline on a black background and white light. As a central logo, there was an overdone hydra. The A of Amer had two dots like Ä, to refer to the Ministry Ä. M. E. R., I think, their 95200 album cover.
Another session, I discovered pink lettering with a description of a sexual position in the middle. The woman was squatting on the man’s dick. This is a position called Jackhammer in Anglo-Saxon. Once, a pair of letters separated their names, but I did not understand if there was a reference or not. Anyway, in a time before social networks, the two Lascars had a strong impact on the local teenagers, of which I was part, mainly for the style they offered. Then they disappeared. It doesn’t surprise me that they fired my shite's communication designer in the end. It’s funny. All through my adolescence, I imagined a gang with black hoods and ghosts that looked like urban legends. In the end, Jack was a tall, blond guy with a nice look. That’s what graffiti is: a board game with shifting rules and Venetian masks. I wondered what Amer might look like.
I was curious. I thought about it as I went to get my money for the last job. I was going to have to quit for a while. The guy who had just paid me saw my swollen head. He knew right away. He knew I’d paid for his kick-ass blind. He thought of karma. I saw it. The real karma was that I had no more money coming in. Later that week, I stopped by to see my parents. I claimed to have been picked on in the street by a bunch of thugs, but I could tell they didn’t believe me. I was too old to be picked on. They were too old to shoot the piano player. So everything was fine. I had some cake and everything and went back to the house, determined to decipher the card.
 
 
 
 
 
It was the most boring business card I’ve ever seen. The typeface had a mechanical, World War II vibe. Assuming his taste for secret societies, I went for cryptology. I hate it. I don’t have a logical mind. I had to get into it. The world today is a world of code. I started quietly with the classics and the atmosphere of the Q. I.
I looked for regularity, a rhythm. I started with the classics of cryptography, like Caesar’s Cipher (A-D, B-E). I made groups of letters to find words like Borel’s theorem. Then, I went to the next level with the Cardan grid, the Morse alphabet, the directory systems... I served myself a whisky and coke (that’s not a code. I did, in fact, serve myself a whisky). I tested the Vigenère table... There was nothing to do. I’m bad with code, even if I don’t like it. I can’t do an Enigma or something like that. What the hell, should only Einstein be able to contact this guy? It can’t be that complicated.
I looked at the map, dumbfounded as a toad is by the moon. Perhaps phosphorescent ink? After all, he was a painter. I turned off the light. Nothing. Then, as I stared at the group of i’s, I thought something was going on with them. That’s when it hit me. There was an H in the middle, with a little imagination, of course. The first letters that stood out were C, I, I, C. After a few erasures, I caught the key: C = 0. So I=6. The beginning was 0660, which was a phone number. The rest followed the pattern of the H. The last numbers were a return to the first ones to confirm the combination. Easy.
All you had to do was call to be sure. It was just past one in the morning. I felt like I was cramming for an exam. I had to know if I was right. I dialed the numbers. I said, "Hello." Then I hung up. It was the same voice.
 
 
 
 chapter 2
 
 
  
We all have absolutely every talent in the world. It’s the little choices in life that make us special. I was attracted to the details found in the drawings. I am the youngest dreamer in a shy family. I began to recognize the drawings at school. I reproduced them. I put Obelix in my hand for a week, watched the shadow of Lucky Luke and the swaying step of Tintin, and became a little comic book forger. I wasn’t looking for quality. I just wanted these characters to belong to me. I was a mess. My left hand was shaking with style. But the imagination and memory of the lines were there. Copying a drawing meant that I could take its universe with me like a suitcase with infinite contents, like Mary Poppins. There is a double life for cartoonists. There are vivid memories of such
or such a drawing that, when seen, copied, or imagined, leaves an indelible trace as much as is possible. I remember my first painting on a small canvas. I could do it again. It was Nefertiti and Tutankhamun, with the Great Pyramid of Giza in the background and a setting sun, in a mix of Egyptian and Japanese influence. There are details in each drawing that can be read or read only by the drawing. The designers recognize the personality in the line, especially in those who have grown up with drawing.
I was socially fit to go to camp at seven, eight, nine... I was the only kid in a bunch of teenagers. I meant absolutely nothing to them. My only asset was my Walkman. I had MC Hammer tapes, a West Coast rap compilation, and MC Solaar in my pocket, along with a mullet cut anarchically by an unemployed friend of my mother. I used to go rollerblading or cross-country biking on weekends in front of my house. Mister freeze in the summer, I used to get my brother’s clothes. Pumps, sweaters (Waikiki or Simpsons). The guys were surprised that I listened to rap music. I had convinced my mom to go talk to the guys who were hanging out on the Parvis de la Défense a few days before I left. One of them had accompanied us to the FNAC and had conscientiously selected my first playlist. That’s what allowed me to accompany Enzo and his friend, who was fifteen years old, when they went to paint the tents of the camp. Colored letters, round or brittle, full, which appeared to me to be enormous. I especially remember their "shiny" effect: a white six-pointed star reproducing the shiny effect. It was beautiful. At the beginning of the school year, as a souvenir and to keep the vapors of the summer in mind, I drew on the beams of my room the three letters of this type: COB. This first act of vandalism was condemned by the local police. My parents then tried to instill in me the notion of "common space."
When I was thirteen, I took classes at the circus school in Nanterre. Three tents in the middle of nowhere, wedged between the Nanterre University and the A86. I learned to juggle on a giraffe (a unicycle as big as stilts). I was not interested in the omnipresent graffiti. I tilted when I saw the guys in action. I had no curiosity at the time, so I questioned the guys. The first one was from Los Angeles. He had painted a creepy chick with a big knife in her hands. I asked the Frenchman who had done the green lettering. His name was Darco. That was it for a week of jerky letters. I went back to take Kodak pictures, still flabbergasted that I had met a black American. My brother would pick up the first hoodies sold at Châtelet or the Saint-Ouen flea market. Dosse Posse. I had a few crappy copies bought at the Nanterre market. The characters were the first B-boy styles, such as Dready, which were later worn by teuffers. The beauty was in the black hood. B-boys had a square jaw. The simple and effective features are close to the other notorious inspiration of the moment: Dragon Ball Z, of course.
Among the aficionados of Club Dorothée, it was the story of Akira Toriyama that held the attention of all the boys. It took me a long time to learn how to make this pattern of jaw, hair, and shoulders that allowed me to create as many Super Sayana as I could. Ears, eyes, nose—absolutely nothing was drawn the way we were used to seeing it. The French comics were too complex for me; beautiful paintings were overloaded and weighed down the reading.
Middle school was a prison where the first gangs were formed. Nicknames abounded. There was a lot of carting around and regular beatings. There was hitting. We didn’t know enough about the pain in the body. I gave myself the nickname "Popo" after Mister Popo in DBZ. The only known black Indian in the history of manga Something hypnotic in the character’s round features and slow aesthetic had seduced me. My brother rode a moped. The Fox Peugeot, the one used by pizza delivery men He used to stash his pot bars in a box to sell them later to his friends. Schott Bombers. Lacoste outfit. Air Max or Caterpillar? Wu-Tang bag. Naughty by Nature sweater. Rolled-up sock. Jacquard sweater. Baggie Jeans. Pit bulls and Rottweilers The full adventure Growing up, the guy would get up at noon. He called me to turn the sound up. 2 Bal 2 Neg, Minister Amer, ATK, La Cliqua, Expression Direkt, Hostile Hip hop, ...
Tons of compilations and freestyles are recorded on the radio or patiently copied on tapes. It gave me a reputation as a rap connoisseur. Guys from middle school would come up to me to catch up or ask me questions.
« What’s a biatch?
"It’s a boat for the rich." Maybe I still had some gaps... I used to hang out in the square in front of my house if I wasn’t in my bathtub all day. In that square, there was a tag. I don’t remember the name of it, but it had arrows and lines all around it. I thought it was great. I imagined a monstrous guy with a black hood and red eyes going out at night and stamping his serial killer seal to scare the people.
Another notorious tag was the one that riddled my grandparents’ house. We had gone with them on vacation. When we returned, the house had been broken into. I was sad for them but also excited that something like that had happened. The burglars had written on the gate: « We’ll be back.» Extreme fright. Later, I would live in this house with my parents. Others would rob it and write "Dirty Jew" on the walls. Some guys from the neighborhood Different times, different customs. That, of course, is not graffiti.
In the end, I never actually saw the graffiti that inspired me. My brother was coming back from one of his adventures. He told me he had visited an abandoned factory near Bezon. Bezon was on the other end of the world. He had seen a giant fresco there. a dark room, or almost. Candles on the floor revealed a huge painting in honor of Candyman. He probably exaggerated the scene, but I was there. Graffiti and horror movies were the fertile breasts of my youthful imagination.
I wasn’t a very good drawer, but I drew and painted often. We had a neighbor I spent time with, Jean Claude Gal, a comic book artist who brought incredible toys back for his son when he came back from the States. He was a young old man, a fog machine, and he used to draw heroic-fantasy scenes with infinite details on his drawing board. I would ask to sit next to him. I would proudly show him my dung, and he would encourage me. Of course, I had about 15 minutes of concentration left, so he was a little annoyed. I would return to show his writer my stories to see if there was a way for me to break into the business. I would later learn that the scriptwriter in question was none other than Jodorowsky himself. Jean Claude Gal died of a heart attack. The cigarettes, I guess. I collected drawings from guys my age. Their style leaned towards Warhammer, Dongeon, and Dragon. I couldn’t go that far. I knew it wasn’t for me. not very free. not very singular. Big hands, big feet. Endless trolls and warriors The kind of Thorgal 2.0. mixed with the comics style: when Vanhamme tries to cross Stan Lee, in big and medium. Me, I was trying to imitate the whole team of the Petit Spirou. It’s a shortcoming that served me well in drawing, as it often does in art. When one learns to draw, one approaches the form with small back and forth movements of the pencil. We press the line as we go along. Some seek their image in circles—circles to put the eyes, the teeth, the legs, everything. This is what the fine art schoolers call "repentance. Not being aware of these techniques, I traced everything directly with a trembling hand. This weakness was my personality. Drawing is like playing the gypsy guitar. You lean on the right hemisphere of your brain. You bend over. You integrate the forms more than the techniques, and you open yourself to pure imagination. We move away autonomously. You stop incorporating other people's designs and begin to develop your own. Of course, I didn’t think of it that way in college. But simple strokes have changed my life and my way of thinking. The next summer, I smoked pot. That, too, must have changed my way of thinking. I moved to Suresnes, a city that was a bit bawdy. I looked for the curves of women on paper or in photos taken on the spot, as best I could. In Spain, I discovered Miro and Salvador Dali. The former because my mother thought I drew better than him, and the latter because he announced the possibility of living in this world while remaining eccentric. The house in Suresnes overlooked the railroad tracks. You could walk around by climbing the little stone barriers. The Poles slept in the old SNCF huts. At night, bands of skin passed silently by. They were planning a raid in who knows where. I found a barrel and ink in my brother’s drawer while trying to steal his weekend pot. It was a shoeshine barrel. Super large.
In second grade, a teacher put me in the back of the class for some reason. I had to talk or draw on the tables. They put me next to a guy who had a punk haircut. He was writing in a book of incomprehensible flies. The guy couldn’t take it anymore. I thought I was dealing with a Satanist bending over his incantations. He was practicing his tagging. I had to realize that a tagger wasn’t necessarily a hip-hop gangster. He was trying to bridge the gap with Arabic calligraphy. I myself had bought
a calamus to try my hand at Arabic calligraphy. Apart from punching holes in leaves, I didn’t get much out of it. My friend, he found the Satan style of tagging. He became a very technical tagger. We drank. We smoked. He told me about other taggers. So I took some leaves and ripped them with erasures to find my incantation.
I didn’t really see any point in stylizing the letters, to tell you the truth. I was just satisfied to simply mark my name and see it again the next day. I was on the street. I met other taggers while participating in a graffiti activity in the city above my house. I drew a boy with a pit bull. The other participants had super clean graffiti. Although they couldn’t draw, they were doing classic Parisian style lettering: big curves and big lines drawn at arm’s length without a gap and without a repeat. They meticulously applied their color plates, inline, outline, and 3D bubbles to land on a mountain of straight lines that bordered on wild style. The magazines began to write their history, to lay down codes and teams of big brothers to be recognized as a school in a world without the excessive communication of the internet, a world where the next town was already far away—a local world. So we put together a team of very different people. We didn’t know that we were going to repeat this name over and over again for decades. So we called it "peeled fat school. Reduced to Fatsk because it was too reminiscent of the True Skool. We attempted our first night outings to drop our filth, hesitant and flowing chrome plates, lettering that was not truly serene, toy tags, and lettering pins for far too ambitious models. So we went to the disused factories of Paris or the suburbs, ruining our clothes and making the style evolve. The articles in the magazines talked about adrenaline. It was an overrated vision. In reality, nobody likes to be caught by the cops. On the other hand, you soon realize that with a little training and a couple of bombs, you can make a bigger mess than you are. With addictive fumes in mind, going home with the satisfaction of having produced a piece that went beyond the A4 sheet was more than enough. For the most part, guys who didn’t know how to draw went directly through the composition and the colors of an almost abstract language. This is an important notion since it makes graffiti the first universal art whose practice adapts to all climates with the naturalness of a weed. An army of self-taught artists chooses four or five letters: a foundation for a lifetime of studying surfaces, lines, and tones. The French went towards schoolboy writing and sober colors: white chrome, black, and red. The Spanish went for extravagant shapes and warm colors. The Germans tend toward 3D and very technical, scrupulous pieces. The Americans have followed a very graphic trend, well representative of their hip hop imagery, which will be followed by the rest of the world in this impressive globalization of tastes and colors.
Other graffiti artists spoke of a pure political commitment, a way of shouting their rebellion to society. It was a bluff. The first pleasure came from the lack of judgment and doing something that wasn't simply about money or success. If you’ve ever tried to do an exhibition, you know what I mean. Judgment. You have to ask assholes to exhibit your work. They judge. Then other assholes judge again. And there you are, asking for a whipping and being told it’s okay to take that kind of risk. At the local café or the MJC, it’s even more gloomy. Going through graffiti was a childish wisdom that saved you from all that nonsense. It was the art of not making the effort and not asking for anything else. There was no question of whether it was legal or not. moral or not. useful or not. We wanted to paint at night and during the day. Under the heat of a wasteland or in the shelter of a street, I had in my features something of Tim Burton's because his drawings had marked me. The childish gloom evoked something in me. His romanticism was seductive. They were my candymen. When I would come back, having drawn huge monsters plated in a plastic bag, I would be able to see them. on the wall, I was satisfied. I thought no one would like it, and that’s why I was doing it. I felt full and fulfilled. I didn’t even take pictures, or I took them rarely, or I would lose the pictures. The marks, the testimony of the experience, were part of the evolution of my line. The pleasure was in the hours of drawing, warmed by the drawing lamp, softened by weed or pot, looped music, and reading.
We had all fallen in love with Johann Sfar, Trondheim, David B,... Their naive and freestyle had replaced the fumes we had been having about Loisel and his revisited Peter Pan. It was a time when I could still fall in love with a style and dive into someone’s universe. The center of the world was in what I was reading and drawing. It’s a pleasure that you lose with time. My crew was interested in drawing. Today, with street art, it seems banal, but at the time, at least in the suburbs, it was an outrage. If you weren’t interested only in lettering, you were disqualified.
I signed up for academic drawing classes to gain some confidence. I just wanted to draw and fall in love at the time—the only two things that really mattered. I didn’t have the ambition to be an artist; that pedantic fatness In academic drawing classes, I spent my time copying things that weren’t sexy: that picture, the class trash can, your buddy, the building, the deformed body of that old man.
I’m a model who's half naked and half in the sack. Recopy it all with your charcoal, your pencil, a pen, a brush, a pastel, and all those things that cost a fortune on sheets that cost a fortune to finally have the privilege of getting the same drawing board as everyone else at the end of the year. Finally... I was developing a knack for printing with a blood-red apple. Graffiti magazines were becoming more and more popular. But to want to be known by being published was considered cheating. You were always meeting more people and more teams. There are the first toys. A guy passes you again. You pass the guy again. Even if you’re pretty much a pacifist, you don’t let it happen to you. If you didn’t react to a coin drop, all your coins would be gone. So we would defend ourselves. Other times, you let it happen. The social structure became more hierarchical. You had to lift the dough in front of the elders and stick to the current style with clearly American letters. If you didn’t make New York revolve around you, you weren’t worth it.
I tried to stick from time to time, but the natural fantasy came back at a gallop. The underground of the Defense Department had been deserted. The Midnight Express and the Black Dragon’s had dissuaded everyone. So La Défense at night was nice. Metropolis' charming underbelly: reinforced concrete, heat, and the few bums who lived there. When you passed someone, they were scared, he didn’t want to know. Past the incestuous patrols of Puteaux, you could breathe in what was no longer the city but its artificial lung. learning to walk on the railroad tracks. Walking without noise was restful. I don’t think I have ever felt more natural in the forest. There were the perimeters and the highways that generated tons of stories. The graffiti artists liked to flex like hunters. A gardav, a broken leg, and a scuffle could also be found in the press articles. Everything that made a young man tick Gloves and beers were fetched from the gas station; marketers were afraid of running into a smart guy running a racket or even cops who didn’t know where to start their investigations. Whatever happened, it all took us out of the stifling intentions of life: trying to go to clubs, hooking up with chicks, working, and shining in society.
I went to an eleventh-grade school to prepare for the competitive exams. a chicken cage. breeding of artists in a cage. They were all about the money. They fed on the hopes of young people to get into school. Some teachers reduced the students to the same broken mentality and the same drawing board. If you got out of line, you were cut off at the hock, or the Procrustean bed, as they say. There, you could admire the beauty of the French approach to educating aspiring artists. The principle was very simple. They would want you to buy the stuff they had partnered with. In case you had never drawn with colored pencils that cost a hundred bucks, now was the time to try. Then came the psychological break. Whatever you proposed, it was a pain in the ass. The teacher had to break you. The boys were blocked by a mixture of hate and guilt. The girls would burst into tears and apologize. Everyone was reverting back to the early childhood stage. Everyone was imagining themselves as Whale in Full Metal Jacket. While the art history teacher was building your credentials, the others were cutting the weeds of your original intentions. It is said that they were preparing you for the game of pathos-free argument. During your competitions, other teachers would break you psychologically in order to warn you of the gallery owners who would break you in order to teach you how to deal with art critics and/or bamboozle an average collector. At the end of Gombrich's vision of art, the thirty-something professors took coke to try to concentrate on something other than the female students in the front row, their taut breasts that smelled of softener, and the call to adultery. No one would have batted an eye anyway. The weight of seeing their child become a bohemian was heavier than anything else. The second kiss-and-tell effect was that the teacher revealed little or nothing about his cooking skills. They themselves were struggling to make sure they achieved stable success. Potentially, you were in competition with the same number of students. It could go dangerously fast if they didn't keep some heads under water. I’m not saying that we already have a mature approach to work, of course; I'm just saying that there were absolutely no exemplary tutors to be found. Finally, every artist can achieve success as a result of a misunderstanding... It doesn’t matter how old he is. We come to the third point: the beginning. The first thing that jumped out at you when you arrived was that there were far too many of us who thought we were unique. In your school, there were thirty weirdos. Here, we could reflect on a generation in which many, many people had wished for a one-of-a-kind life, a generation that, for the first time, had the right to take a chance, a generation that had the embarrassment of choice. If they thought they were fortune tellers too soon, the consequences for their future are severe. So the schools made their money on the disillusionment industry. Confined. Concentrated on the same Malevich collage but in a cheap version, the exacerbated competition of the human who wants to survive was mixed with the hard realization of the surrounding nonsense. The truth was this: The merit did not belong to the best, because there was no precise goal to reach. Only obnoxious and disorderly prohibitions were in place to aid your education, similar to the Cours Florent, where the other half of the Parisian bobo was throwing money around. Talking about graffiti in the middle of everything was meant to elicit two minutes of rage from the students, possibly more than from the teachers. Suburban style was definitely not fashionable. I remember a ridiculous tirade from a student shocked to learn about my few tags. His wrath was directed at my lack of respect for the taxpayer, my gullibility in the movement, my desire to be a scumbag, and the ugliness of my acidic murals. Maybe he was right. Irony made me cross his path again. After passing the Beaux Arts, he became a graffiti artist of the organic-wild style and a muralist. In short, he did a little of everything that was possible to find his place in this environment. Thanks to God, it was an exceptional case. The majority of the assaults were carried out by Duperre- or profile-bitches, or by good cop/bad cop professors. With an air of concern, they explained to you that the practice of graffiti came from a lack of self-esteem. You needed social recognition on a small scale, so you sank into graphic delinquency, a communion that allowed you to bear the mediocrity of your existence. Maybe they were right too. But they were no better.
The year went by quickly. My drawing board was stolen in the last month before the competitions, another effect of the competition system pushed to its extreme and the archaic system of the drawing board. It was necessary to integrate this new information, which follows any artist throughout his career. Some men can win competitions by presenting the work of another. This is a general fact. Many artists steal. Many artists steal their entire lives. I redo my file, trying to reproduce my own theme. But the heart was not there anymore. At that time, I was mixing all the references without counting... I was a student, and students want to integrate everything right away, without refining or making distinctions. The originality of my work was based on the technique. I mixed oil paint with a brush and spray paint. The noble, academic painting of the classical period was represented by oil painting. A panel of bourgeois and riff-raff paintings on the same frame, in short, the French society I knew.
At that time, it was unthinkable to use spray paint on canvas. Canvas was far too expensive to be smeared with spray paint. A spray can was far too expensive not to be used on canvas. Canvas was far too expensive to be smeared with spray paint. A spray can was far too expensive not to be used. I would steal my material from Rougier and Plé, and occasionally from Virgin or BHV for small items. But that wasn’t enough, so mixing all these media was more like a waste for my meager audience.
The graffiti was being refined there. It was time for the cut technique. It consisted of covering a line drawn by another line and thus refining it. This technique allowed some people to create very detailed, tiny graffiti. Lettering in the shape of spaceships was seen on the streets. We, on the other hand, experienced the fat cap. The WC made us discover the world of the trainists, aka the graffiti geeks. Painting on trains or subways was a logical next step for those who wanted to continue to grow in graffiti, this endless sport. Trains attracted the curious, and the addicts were tired of street vendettas. The story of the idiot who challenged you to a duel because you were too visible was endless. It had driven many of them back to the trenches of the depots. The trains were indeed less violent, but more dangerous. You had to be organized because every time you committed an offense, you were investigated, and a flagu' hurt both your mouth and your wallet. Some of them got disproportionate sentences.
At home, shake out the paints. Have good gloves. Erase fingerprints. Delete any recent phone calls. Write names on cans. Throw away mock-up sketches and anything else that’s lying around before you leave. A slew of paranoid reflexes that had saved countless lives.
I successfully entered an art school. At first, I was motivated, but the cake quickly fell off. It was a hideout for the teachers as well as for the students. A quick primer on school codes: a classic promo featured a guy who couldn't decide between sewing and Warhol bis, a girl who worked on body performances or how to turn leather and latex photos into art... Chicks who drew their guy’s dick, guys who painted their chick’s pussy, punks who scribbled insults, roots who scribbled spirals, golden numbers, and mushrooms, professors who were tired after their nap, and bourgeois dreamy women Then, my colleague and I represented the guys from the suburbs: affirmative action, Benedictine promotion, Yoyo! We welcome you, but don’t act like a fool. In the hood, I had become unattractive because I was in a school for "bourgeois. And in the said school, I was automatically excluded by the associations of young, rich, white Parisians who had the art of intrigue and treachery in their blood. And all this beautiful world looked at each other in the white of the eye while rolling cigarettes and saying to themselves: «What the fuck am I doing here? big, big doubt about the merits of decentralization. At least it kept me from getting up at noon, a bit like a civil servant being reassured not to be unemployed. My work was criticized abruptly, with no real path to follow and no material to go further. I felt trapped. Talking to a fifth-grade guy made me feel even more hopeless. It felt like we were in a deserted village, with a bar in the middle and a moribund future around it. After a few attempts at painting, art books, and audio editing, I sank. A little bit of fatigue digested in anxiety attacks and depression. I turned in my badge. I fled to Spain for a month, seeking redress in the arms of a girl. I came back to find a temporary job, then two, then three... Rope walker, animator, cashier, machinist, receptionist, story boarder, physio, bricklayer, house painter, valet, storekeeper, graphic designer with the option of providing a false resume, muralist, parking lot attendant... As my grandfather used to say, when you’re good at everything, you end up good at nothing. Each time, I came across people who got into the job out of spite and who ended up staying all their lives. The story of the majority of us earthlings The years go by, and we find ourselves with nothing concrete because we have not taken care of the efforts we have to give to our own destiny. Sometimes dreams are wrong. I got into the decorating business. I met this guy. I vandalized the blinds for money. I met Jack. It was this love for drawing, art, rap, and graffiti that he was looking for in me. He took me through my first corporate life. He took me to the next level.
 
 
 chapter 3
 
 
 
 It just looked like another asscombing office, except the workshop part was a bit more messy. He slept in a suburban industrial area, with warehouse space downstairs and the office and workshop upstairs. A veranda cut the space in half for the manager’s office and the meeting room. The guys in the workshop were observing the newcomers with a slight smell of spray paint. They wanted to give themselves a kind of French start-up with a kitchen and a relaxation area, but in a ramshackle Saint-Denis style. The start-ups were made up of underpaid young people who had the right to dress as they wished in exchange for their rights to the labor code: the new definition of freedom stamped by Walt Disney. Jack introduced me to his team. A young Asian woman was in the Digital Marketing position. A Portuguese man represented the entire graphics department. There were two empty offices, those of a couple who took photos and videos for the com’, an English woman and a Parisian. They had made their mark in rap videos. A blond girl named Lisa was in charge of events, relations, and sales. We moved to the southern hemisphere. The workshop manager was a Nigerian. I knew his graffiti. He signed Funk. He had swept up a cop who was chasing him at the time. That earned him a tour in the shade. As for the rest, the paint crew downstairs were classic graffiti artists. They tried to disguise their names, but I knew most of them. There were VMD, SLK, and other local crews. Like all graffiti artists, they tried to erase their street side as much as possible, but the accent, the hands, and the faces could not erase anything. In short, it was like a rehabilitation center for average graffiti artists. average in their careers, not in their talents, I mean. I had to be part of this social recycling.
I entered the office. A window overlooked the quays of the Seine. There were some paintings by street artists like Misstic and Obey, art toys, comic book figurines, African masks, and a guitar. A canvas behind the desk presented a poster of Jeffrey Célavie, a street-fashion feminist artist. I waited for my coffee with absolutely no thoughts in my head. I don’t like to intellectualize. I am an instinctive person. The tall, blond guy was in front of me. He was typing on the computer, so I started.
«-All these people who work here, did they decipher your coded card?
-Yes, it is. But there are two numbers on this card. The line you call out shows the code you decrypted.
What was the other code?
- Milk... An invisible ink. All you had to do was pass the card over the candle, and the number would appear on the back. It’s simpler, but some people don’t see things as simple. It’s like a little personality test.
"So, do I go to the offices or to the workshop?" He clasped his hands in front of his mouth, that condescending intellectual triangle and still that benevolent sight. Humans... As soon as you put them behind a desk, they adopt a panoply of mimics that often resemble bad acting. They mime life.
It doesn’t work exactly like that. We do an interview. You already know our graffiti, I suppose, mine and Amer’s.
- Clearly.
It was a great time. We had a lot of fun. Only, we got older in the meantime. We had to change. The graffiti artists of our generation do not shine by their professional insertion. Graffiti has taken up all the space and energy reserved for progress in society.
Is this a regret?
It’s like this. Some people say graffiti destroyed their lives, and others say it saved them. Both are true, I guess. What interests me is that graffiti artists have developed other qualities and a certain mentality—an autonomy. I’m the same... Spending my life waiting—the rules, all that—wasn't my thing. So we created this box. It looks structured here, but it’s not. There’s no real hierarchy, but there are groups that associate themselves according to the jobs. The workshop group was here first, with Amer and myself. We started by doing small street marketing jobs. Our clients were the local rappers or street artists, who were not very well known. We would stick stickers and posters on them. We were helping them develop. Nothing beats the street in terms of marketing. It’s always the best advertising. It’s our trademark. Street equals ad. We did our first big hit for the release of Lunatic’s album Mauvais Oeil. The budget was small, but because of the success of the album, other rappers wanted to work with us. We had covered the capital in less than a week. Then, clothing brands wanted to launch themselves on Châtelet. We embauched more graffiti artists. We were contacted for the release of Sheitan by Kim Chapiron. We went rollerblading and made stencils on the sidewalks of Panama. And here we are. I recruited people to be present on the internet and at events. We put a logo on a website, and we started as you see us today.
How do you deal with the fact that it is legal?
We have a lawyer who advises clients on the risks involved, but the ratio between the payment to be paid for a real ad and the one to be handed over to the courts in case of a problem is naturally convincing. We leave the responsibility to the client. He signs a release, and we keep a low profile. That’s why graffiti artists are hired. They know how to be discreet.
How do you approach customers?
He swayed back.
Word of mouth, a good reputation, targeted canvassing, and... Well, let’s just say we have an effective salesperson. That’s why you’re here, by the way. You know that street artist named Jeffrey?
"Yeah, sure, she’s super famous!"
Jeffrey was a street artist like the fashionable one. She started putting up posters in Paris, near the galleries. She got noticed by putting up posters in an American propaganda style from the 1950s. She imitated advertisements that were aimed at women, like the smoker, the truck driver, or even the interior woman who borders on the pin-up. She adorned her ads with round sunglasses on the female faces and with her cursive and glamorous signature. Lichtenstein-style print screens, a bit like D-Face, Seen, or Mike Giant, were used to enhance the art prints she sold on her website. It was catchy, but the pop-art Kai Ni style in Paris was not my thing. The girl had worked on the street for only two years before being picked up by a gallery. Easy money. She was really smart. On her website, she made anti-advertising calls. She invited her fans to paint her round sunglasses on the ads in their neighborhood and sign them with her name. It was really cool. I liked the idea of a public, shared, community artist.
Did you ever notice that logo?
-Yes. It’s a graffiti group, right? What are their names again?
"The Cool Kidz."
The logo represented a sort of owl’s head. Two adjacent arcs formed a beak in a larger circle, with two lines for eyes. It was like the V for Vendetta logo but with two owl eyes. They were always found near Jeffrey’s posters.
"Well, here it is. This logo is our logo. This is our agency. And Jeffrey is our agent too.
What does that mean?
We were first contacted by a French street artist, a guy from Neuilly, who was selling large sculptures of gorillas in fiber.
-Oh yes! I know it...
The guy was losing money, and he needed to regain his street credibility so he wouldn’t collapse before he was 50. As famous as he was, he had never set foot outside, nor had he touched a single graffiti can. So we took care of him. We put monkeys in the streets like Banksy and made little tags on his gorillas. He paid a lot of money. We saw the madness of the street art market, the Banksy madness, and all that it generated as money. Being from the graffiti world, poor relation of the Street art, the vice bit us and we started. We created Jeffrey. She is a virtual artist. an artist invented from scratch. Lisa, our press, print, and event manager, introduced Jeffrey to the galleries. She posed as his agent in Paris. She talked about Jeffrey Célavie, an artist from New York, to the gallery owners in the Marais, Rive Gauche, and Matignon who were used to hearing about him. The graphic designer created a visual identity, a website, and networks. We bought printers. The team from the workshop went to make the street collages for one or two years. Then they stuck stickers, posters, painted stencils and graffiti of the Cool Kidz and Jeffrey Célavie during their regular outings.
-But yes! I thought the Cool Kidz and Jeffrey Celavie were at war with each other. They always have their logos in the same place. That makes sense.
-That’s part of the storytelling that we put in place. We created this atmosphere of clash to raise interest and stick a bit of both during our night out. I hired a hacker to disseminate some information to Google here and there, just to flesh out Jeffrey. He set up site protection and labyrinthine chat groups to avoid being too exposed to investigations. And that’s it. On one side, we have a community of enthusiasts, and on the other, we have investors and feverish people who wouldn’t miss the next artist of the moment for anything. These entities are our lucrative fronts. Through them, we can set up somewhat complex structures and use the strength of our audience. Their reputation attracts our clientele to develop a long-term activity. The real business happens here, in the back room, where we grow quietly.
How does this affect your income?
-The clientele of the openings... They are business leaders and collectors who won’t stick their toes in the graffiti artists’ pockets. But they love the glamour of the galleries. It’s hard for us to meet them under better conditions than at openings. Just say, "I know the Cool Kidz" or "I know Jeffrey Célavie. Even though they are tempted to buy a painting by Jeffrey, we offer to make the artist work for them under the cover of our company. For them, Jeffrey is the brains of this street marketing business. When it takes off, they’re willing to pay big. They think it’s cool. They’re like part of the secret. It excites them. You follow?
Yeah, it’s clever... But why tell me so easily? I could make a big deal out of this information... I could break your little bu- siness? Isn’t that a little dangerous?
I noticed some parallels between our company and yours. You do exactly what we do. You set up little street wars and graffiti stories to fill the canteen. secrets with business leaders to feed your creativity. It’s the same business. Am I wrong?
I don’t have any business.
-Stop. I did my little investigation.
He was smiling wickedly.
"I get your little game. You’re getting paid to give bad publicity to a company that competes with the one that hires you. It’s a good idea. It came to you on its own, or are there several of you on it?
I don’t know what you’re talking about.
"I took pictures of your blinds."
He pulled a handful of the few Kodachromes from his drawer. The flash gave the impression of an exhibit. I told him:
What do you plan to do with this?
-Nothing. I took them for my own pleasure.
I take pictures of graffiti... You know, like a lot of graffiti artists. I walk around. I look at what’s going on in the streets—what’s moving. I’m a real enthusiast, you know. And I couldn’t help but see similarities in all this graffiti, despite your best efforts.
I didn’t feel very comfortable. He took over:
I need your trust because I need your talents. I won’t threaten to snitch. That would be ridiculous. I want us to partner up. You deserve more resources to do better.
You want my clientele?
-No. Not really... We already have a clientele. We want to think bigger. And we want to get out of an impasse too. I haven’t finished my little story... In everything we’ve done so far, our biggest success has been Jeffrey Celavie. His image, what he represents in the art landscape... That’s really worked out well. But Jeffrey’s strength is his participatory side. It’s a real power. You would see the passion of the public for this artist on Discord and the networks we set up! It gave us the weight and strength to go after our main client of the moment: Coca-Cola. I don’t know if you noticed, but our national logo’s artwork all features a Coke bottle.
That’s right. All the posters showed a woman drinking Coke or some other drink with the group, even in the background. I assumed it didn't matter. It was just product placement. Ultimately, it was consistent with the history of marketing, which has always gone hand in hand with feminism. The first American feminist revolutions introduced cigarettes as a whole new product to the female market. I asked out of curiosity:
«-How did you get Coca in your clients?»
The girl, Lisa, walked into the office. Jack said
right on cue.
Lisa was an extrovert, pleasant, not very tall, a little mouse who didn’t say much, but the intelligence could be read in her eyes.
«-It wasn’t easy. But I had my way. In Paris, there were only a few galleries that started to take advantage of street art. They were groping. I would enter the chosen gallery at a time when there was no one there, avoiding the assistants. I took the time to walk around. I had to wait for the gallery owner to get up from his seat. I would choose a painting that I liked better than the others, so I didn’t have to say whether the work on display was rotten. There’s always one painting that you like better than the others. Then I would simply describe what I saw. I had to drop a few references to show I knew a little about it. You have to work it, you know? So the gallery owner is curious to grasp who I am. This is the part where I explain that I work for Jeffrey. Usually, the graffiti crew has managed to put up posters nearby, a month in advance, near the gallery, and the digital marketing girl, Jo, has targeted their mailboxes and apps to receive press articles about Jeffrey. When we target someone in particular, we say we’re doing an inception, like the movie. We’ve had three deals like that. They’ve become good partners. We sell almost half the pieces at every solo show.
never sold out?
-Not yet... We’re selling high. But it did lead us to reach the Senior Vice President of Marketing Operations for Beverage Partners Worldwide at an auction.
What is this?
"He handles campaigns for Coca-Cola and Nestlé," underlined Jack.
-Why him?»
Lisa placed a buttock on the desk. It was a little overplayed.
Jeffrey takes up the posters from the 1950s. In most of them, it's a beautiful or strong woman drinking a soda. It attracts positive interaction from Parisian women. They take a large number of pictures of our street artists and relay them on their Instagram... And the insta of the Parisians bitches allows to have the attention of numerous women in the world.
You do product placement in street art and on social media?
Once the data was there, we put pressure on the brand. Since Andy Warhol's Campbell's cans, there hasn't been much of a distinction between advertising and artwork.
How do we put pressure on Coca-Cola?
-With numbers, exels, data, power points and PDFs, everything that makes companies happy. The numbers were there, and most importantly, it cost them nothing compared to their traditional marketing campaigns. Jeffrey’s fan community is pure fanaticism. They collect the posters, buy them, and sell them at a premium. They talk about it all day long. They reproduce the posters in the street. They advertise Coke, thinking they are doing anti-advertising. It’s pure ambush marketing for our client. Unheard of! Even at their best agencies,...
His excitement has subsided.
«We then showed potential future work by Jeffrey. Coke disengaged. So we took a chance.
-?
Jack stepped in.
Since they didn’t take us seriously, we put pressure on them. Jeffrey and his companions had the option of turning around. Engaging in real anti-pub campaigns and really targeting Nestlé and Coca It would have highlighted other aspects of these big brands: Collaboration during World War II, African genocide, and the decadent health of American society—all their taboos She would have sent her fans tearing up their ads, slashing, writing political tags, and harassing bad buzz about bad buzz and our teams all over the world.
This is blackmail!
Everything is blackmail.
It’s cynical.
So you’re too idealistic for us. This is business. There are sharks out there. We would unleash an army of journalists and bloggers who follow the artist. It would be good for the artist, but not for them. Because they're dropping us, we have an opportunity to make Jeffrey a truly free artist and sell as such. If not, we will go bankrupt. We have more expenses than income...
It seems a bit complicated to me. The art world can boycott you. Coke can spy on you.
- No spying. That’s why we get all the instructions in the blackbooks in writing.
- Blackbooks?»
Jack pulled a black moleskin from the desk.
It will be placed on your desk every morning. The instructions for the day or week can be found here. You answer by writing in it. We forbid all communications on phones and computers. «All of them are work-related.»
I observed the object and its disturbing simplicity. The simplicity of writing on paper was being used as a bulwark against digital espionage. It was a bit like raising hawks to attack drones. My business was twisted, but this was a level above. Champions. I turned to Lisa:
They can sue for defamation.
French law protects artists, especially when it comes to pastiche. It is inviolable. in the name of freedom of expression.
Still, it is very risky.
-Yes. But that’s what it took for us to pull out a suburban company with only middle and lower classes, artists, and outcasts. Do you have anything better? Here, we have no state support, no beautiful farmers, and even fewer investors. If they attack Jeffrey, we’ll make big publicity for the artist, and we’ll get away with it. It’s double or nothing. For me, we will always win.
Do they pay you on account?
They buy Jeffrey’s work.
This is my system. I do the same thing with the blinds.
- Yes. It’s the Bettencourt system.
It’s completely immoral.
-Yes. This is the art world.
Jack pointed at me with a tune of "N'allons pas trop vite."
«-That's why we hire you. Ever since Coke announced that they were no longer interested in Jeffrey’s campaigns, it’s been like a... crisis situation, let’s say. We don’t want to fire anyone. So we have to react quickly and well. We need to be smart. It’s a technical passage.
From Lisa’s pout, I could tell it was her baby slipping out of her hands. Jack resumed:
Amer thinks you are the man for the job.
-Amer?
The instructions in the blackbooks are handwritten by the company's CEO. And I think you can help in this transition phase too. There’s a place for you.
-I’m not the right person. I’ve never been a leader or anything else. I’ve never worked for a company or a team. I’m the most antisocial person you’ve ever seen. I’m too anti-social, even for graffiti artists. That’s what I mean.
You went to art school, and you do graffiti. You have your ass between two chairs. That must be a disadvantage in your daily life. But it's just right for us. A man only has to sell the specificity of his talents to a company... And talent is experience in a sector. Your sector, strangely enough, is exactly ours: the meeting of art, advertising, and graffiti. Rubatosis. It’s an English word for being aware of your own heartbeat. There, I had my legs crossed. The impulses of the blood in my femoral artery made my foot move slightly. Maybe the coffee Monachopsis. That’s another word for the persistent feeling of being out of place. It’s true that I had always been in the wrong place. The graffiti artists suspected me of intellectualism because I had passed the entrance exam to a school, but the gallery owners only saw me as a social educator because I worked with spray paint. It is the syndrome of the suburbanite. If you didn’t fit into a box, you couldn’t do anything in this damn country of robots. The interview situation was still crazy. That was about the only argument that appealed to me. That and the fact that I was in dire need of money, of course.
How did you know I went to art school, anyway? - It’s marked in the police file... in the occupation box. I couldn’t find the school mentioned.
-It closed.»
I had sort of burned that school after I left. The Hauts-de-Seine had the misfortune of publishing a special issue of a magazine that was distributed to every mailbox. A guy wanted to interview me. It ended up as a double-page spread in the center of the magazine, revealing a pamphlet about my old school and what it meant to me. The city council announced its closure just a few months later. Between graffiti, my school, and my own life, it seems that I am an artist of destruction. If the job was to destroy Coca-Cola’s communication, then maybe I had to catch the butterfly on the fly.
You must have had some time to learn about art history before slamming the door. What do you know about street marketing? Lisa, can you leave us, please?
I cracked my knuckles as Lisa walked out of the office.
"Street marketing" is a subgroup of modern advertising that draws on the codes of graffiti. It allows client groups to get more sympathy and attention from their targets... Because they are not quite used to this kind of approach... Because the truth is that no one can control the constant harassment of ads anymore. So the very principle of today’s ads is to look like anything but ads. Street marketing used to be used by contract workers who didn’t have the resources of big companies to make themselves known. In real life, it’s called guerrilla marketing. Guerrillas like Che Guevara Like, how to fight the official armies with little means... Today’s guerrilla marketing is a sanitized version of what it really was. It was the small alternative brands and labels that started this story. Marc Ecko, the graffiti artist behind the brand Ecko Unlimited, distributed stencils with his logo and a colored bomb to every beggar in New York, along with a shoe, promising them the second when the bomb was finished. The same goes for Jay Z, the rapper, when he was dealing cocaine in Brooklyn. He put all his money into the collage. He had the little spotters water the apple. Afterwards, he could negotiate the free recording studio knowing that his album was already highly anticipated.
very American.
- Clearly. The movement was born from poor but creative artists who tried their luck on a bluff, all sprinkled with story-telling. The big companies, which are slower, first wanted to get these artists before subcontracting with boxes like...
-Us. »
He raised his eyebrows, as if to say that everything made perfect sense, that everything was done so that we would be there, doing this interview.
-What do you think of our fake street artist idea?» - It’s interesting. Many people have the fantasy of meeting Banksy. But it’s not that simple. Often, the art world is more hermetic than expected. And the philosophy is not the right one. But with your company, you have more chances than others.
But what else?
Street artists often betray the codes of graffiti. I like the idea of the non-existent artist. I don’t like the Robin Hood side.
That’s exactly it. We looked at the Banksy question. That’s how we came up with the idea of Jef-Frey. We said to ourselves that it was a group with a leader. We removed the leader and his vigilante side. We kept the disillusioned but frank side of the pop artist and the company. Here, we love Andy Warhol. We want Jeffrey to live on her own, like a modern-day Warhol.
Jack offered me a cigarette and pulled out an old Coke bottle. I didn’t hear the "spritz," but it did help lighten the mood. Jack said:
« What do you think of Banksy?
I prefer Shepard Fairey. I love the Orwellian idea of a big brother embodied by the wrestler. Shepard used Invasion Los Angeles as his reference film. We are in a totally conspiratorial environment. I love it. His leitmotiv, "The medium is the message," is a good summary of his relevance.
Marshall McLuan
- Yes. I love it too. A visionary... Like Shepard, Banksy reproduces the idea of a movie. Banksy is none other than Tyler Durden in Fight Club. It is his film. His fantasy. A leader at the start of an activist group is impossible to capture because he arose from the imagination of a person or group. This is what a graffiti artist and his group do on a small scale. In his film, Banksy presents another character, his antithesis, Mister Brainwash, who may not really exist. He is presented as an invention of Banksy who highlights the ridiculousness of street art and the art market. We do not know if Mister Brainwash is invented by Banksy or if it is the opposite. a beautiful form of pop art. In Fight Club, it is exactly the same. All the characters are projections of the hero. Even the house represents the hero's mental space, as in the tradition of expressionist films or as in Psycho or Shining.
I read somewhere that the author wanted to talk about his wife’s cancer. I thought that was a cool read about the interaction between the biological body and the social body. Fight Club completely influenced the 2000s.
It hit me square in the heart.
- ...That’s for sure. It gets better! Banksy clearly shows Brad Pitt as a guest of honor at his exhibition. It may have been just a wink, but later I found out that Brad Pitt was Banksy’s main collector. That’s it. Banksy is an artist who was inspired by Fight Club and is backed by Brad Pitt. Incredible, isn’t it? and you do the same with Jeffrey.
and especially with the Cool Kidz. His Mr. Brainwash is our Jeffrey. And as Mister Wash, it’s very perishable. That’s why Coke escapes... Jeffrey is simply less fashionable. Despite its fanaticism, its clientism may be a little too obvious to the general public. It needs to change...
He sighed through his nose. The sigh swept up some rather long nasal hairs, which created an almost inaudible hiss. I wasn’t waiting for him to talk numbers anymore. He was clapping his hands on the table. big graffiti hands that contrasted with his angelic face. I remained stoic. Poker face. He said:
"Here you go. Research and development That’s your charge. You’re going to take on our Jeffrey, create his concepts, and find a way to stimulate his community. You’re going to organize her street marketing and give him scale. And we don’t want bullshit. With or without our partnership, we want Jeffrey to get serious, and we want her to make money. You have to keep that in mind. We’re investing in you so we can manage better, do you hear me? We pay two thousand a month in cash. You try it out for a month. You come in on Monday at nine for the meeting. You dress as you like. I’ll see to it that the complaint against you is dropped. Is that all right?
-It’s okay...»
I went home with a strange satisfaction. I could see the graffiti flying by. I could hardly believe that they gave me a job.
The impact of graffiti has been largely underestimated. However, it was present everywhere. In a kind of art evolutionism, it was still regarded by institutions with the same scorn as primitive cultures. But it was just as old as contemporary art. It was to go further when Western art did not know what to do after Marcel Duchamp. In the graffiti, everyone marked his name, and paradoxically, it was an anonymous movement. There was no canvas, no subject, not even an exhibition or presentation. Just nature. a signature that some had been practicing for forty years. The same four or five letters with the same hunger for the pure tag. A few quasi-abstract movements were repeated for entire lifetimes—thousands of lifetimes. It was an art that stood alone. It was retaliation for the mixed peoples who had become slaves, imported by history into great capitals, civilizations' hearts, and, even better, their suburbs, where one was uglier than in the city center. Were we ugly because we worked hard, or did we work hard because we were ugly? Go figure.
The graffiti took over the cities like trees, each with its own species. All became the same growing forest, a city animism, with pigments blown as if on a hand affixed in the city's dark caverns. The tag established itself on the ground of advertisements for this perfect world, where subliminal sexual messages and allusions to the perfect, white family and its unattainable American furniture were concentrated. City dwellers should say thank you for stripping away the artifice, for blurring the attention sensors, for destroying or at least showing that someone or something else is resisting. The tag would intrude into the heart of the Pax Romana and its sweet power of subjugation. These lined-up names emerged from shame. And, if the graffiti was ephemeral, its ensemble took over indefinitely. The idea of graffiti was laid down. It remained like the barbaric gestures alien to Greek democracy, this democracy that could only survive by making barbarians, slaves, and leaving behind the most exquisite corpses.
 
 
 chapter 4
 
 
  
The first rite of passage into adult life, in the West, is the day we understand Santa Claus doesn’t exist. It’s an initiation into lying. It's like getting ready for the rest of your adult life. Children, now adults, go into professions they choose according to their ideals. Most of them want to do something good. Then they find out that the chosen field is corrupt. Their work is the opposite of what they wanted. Lawyers become lawyers so that powerful companies don’t have to worry about the law. Psychologists advise brands to insert their addictions deeply into people. Or they work to quarantine individuals who are no longer in control. The artists understand they must follow the codes of the businessmen and not denounce anything or invent anything, so they don’t even know what art is anymore. The artists understand that they must follow the codes of the businessmen and not denounce anything or invent anything, so that they do not even know what art is anymore. Model employees realize that it is useless for them to be productive or innovative; the important thing is to play elbows to climb the ladder of the hierarchy. Politicians want to act for the good of their group, but in order to reach a position of power, they have to make so many concessions that they no longer do anything for the common good and simply become careerists mired in corruption. and bullshit jobs, and bullshit relationships, and bullshit all aspects of life. Society is made up of children who have been swindled about the nature of their condition, its meaning, and their interests, and whose main ritual, if Christmas is anything to go by, is to perpetuate this lie in order to survive in the group. And when an adult child realizes that he or she is living in a corrupt environment, he or she technically has three possible solutions: One, they corrupt themselves; they adapt. Two. Go in search of another environment, which is often also corrupt. Three. To fight, which concerns a minority of us because it is totally ungrateful. Man adapts. He corrupts himself. It is part of his genetic code. Look into your field of activity, and you will see that you are part of this generalized evil...
 
So I arrived at the office with a clear conscience, telling myself that I was doing it for the money and security and, well, what can I say, that's life, and it was time. I hadn’t been out all weekend, which is rare. I wanted to have a clear head. The office was almost full when I walked in. Clamping. Pedro, the graphic designer, was having a hard time. He serves me coffee. «Conio. Look at that. Fucking onions. I have hands made for art and they’re in the shit.» He had big hands, a little bulging but with thin fingers, hands that beat themselves up and play the violon. On my corner of the desk stood my black Moleskine, and in its belly was already a word.
 
 
Hi Domi
 
We're meeting at 9 a.m. this morning. Be sure to attend. That means learning quickly and taking initiative. That’s what you’re here for: initiatives.
Amer
 
Ps: Don’t show your blackbook to anyone. The information is confidential.
 
Everyone was busy at the workshop table. The only thing missing was the videographers' couple. Everyone has a Monday face except Jack. The guy was impeccable. He looked like a big company boss without the big company. He only had one idea in mind: getting out of his condition. He was already gone. He was in the future with Booba, a cocktail in hand, and the latest Macbook to send his emails. I guess we all look like someone who expects better from life, at least before 50, of course. The meeting was done with croissants and a scare on Lisa’s face, who was definitely losing her grip on her client. The shock was as recent as my intrusion into their little family.
"When they have our fucking canvases in their meeting room," Funk said.
Lisa tried to tell us a lot of things, including why and how, but we could see that there was not much to say except that they were losing money. Lisa had studied art and business at a private school. She first worked for a fledgling gallery. The owner was loaded with money but not necessarily knowledgeable about the rules of art. The gallery was going to fold in less than a year. So they decided to set up a participatory system where artists would pay to be exhibited without having any real chance of success. It caused him ethical problems with Lisa. Jack came in at that point. Pedro had nothing else to say. He did. Maybe Jeffrey was a crap artist. She was simply out of fashion. These things happen. It’s going to be ten years before she has an old-school aura, and still...
Pedro seemed to have the same sensitivity as me. Except maybe on the appearance. His fashion victim appears to be a slash low-brow hipster, with his socks pulled up, biker hat, disillusioned expression, and black humor concealed. A special fact: he was a synesthete. He saw colors when he heard sounds, and vice versa. That’s what gave him his special knowledge of colors. It was like a superpower. In his case, it was more of a handicap. He sucked at school because of all the crap that was going on in his mind. He got a CAPTCHA. He worked for a printer who took pity on him. He paid for a two-year graphic design course so that he could try to do something better with his life. When he left school, he came to this company to put his special gift for color to good use.
And why doesn’t Jeffrey simply change her style? She can evolve after all, right?» question from Johanna She looked more serene. Jo worked at home or in the office. She liked to laugh at her own jokes with a convulsive laugh. She wore sky pants. She liked hip hop dancing. She had jargon around her profession, marketing, which she embellished with onomatopoeia. For me, digital marketing is people who hang out on Facebook, but I have to admit that they are the kings nowadays. Jo is in demand by everyone. She landed here because she wanted to be adventurous.
I knew we’d run into a glass ceiling with Jeffrey. Loose! I busted my ass to get him a hundred thousand followers and two thousand commits to every post. Pffff! Yikes. I hope I didn't waste my two years of whore-for-likes! It’s not enough for a big brand because you can’t see his face! This is so stupid. We can’t make a video. We can’t do anything. except vandalized videos of actions at night. The communication is wrong! "We hire an actress, a chick that’s too good, and that’s it!" Everyone took exception to it. It seemed to go against the grain. Funk remarked that if we hired an actress, it would backfire on the box in no time.
I asked Jo:
What are the other sources of income for the company?
There are promos for rappers and street wear, but frankly, the sooner we drop them, the better. Ahahah!
-Why?
Ah, go ahead. It’s a pain. They pay nothing. They shit on everything. They think they are important. They are tortured. It’s a pain in the ass. Now there are way too many of us for it to pay off. Lisa cut her off. The little girl was transformed by rage. She had no time to lose.
"We attack them. We stuff two weeks' worth of ads, like we said, the Nestlé and Coca-Cola files, pure and simple counter-advertising. We’re offending dry!
Jack turned to me. He was looking at me.
Can Mr. Art History take care of it? Can you find us some leads?
I was uncomfortable. Loving solitude tricked me. I don’t think I’ve ever been in a serious meeting where I was supposed to be a serious person. When I do, I make weird movements. I have Fester Addams contractions. After a series of tics, I said:
Yes, I can. I can work on that.
Do you have any ideas?
Well, not really. But it can be found easily. Coca was used by the Nazis and...
"Yes, we know that. Okay. So, are we on?
I had to come out of my shell. I wasn’t there to enjoy the radiator. I cleared my throat.
«In India, there was a scandal involving the Coca-Cola company. They created a water brand. They wanted to sell remineralized tap water. Their drinks contained pesticides—like forty times the standard amount—that gave cancer to everyone. They were able to do this because there was no control over it, not like in Europe. As a result, Greenpeace got tangled up in it. The Indians took to the streets to burn the Coke bottles. India ended up banning the brand on its territory... By the way, there was a similar situation in Mexico. The inhabitants were suffering from a lack of water. Cola recapped the majority of the drinking water. The water was sold in bottles. This created tons of plastic waste. The population suffered; people went to the streets, but the Mexican president is actually... the former president of Coca in Mexico. So, it was hard to move the lines.
Jo said:
That’s pretty good. At least I can put some substance into the papers I’m serving up to blogs and chats. It’s a change. a few writings and inlays to explain the topic. Jack, will you give me the reference for the articles on the internet?
Funk: "It will be a change from the Kinris posters." Lisa pitched
So, do we go? Do we really attack them head-on? They were playing their role of welcome. But something was missing. So I added:
Do you know about NFTs?
-The what?
The NFT The non-fungible token I’m surprised you’re on Discord and don’t know about NFTs.
The monkeys there
-Yes, these are the guys who made their fortune with NFTs.
Why does everyone make monkeys?
I guess it's because we're a bunch of monkeys on a rolling stone... or because the others want to make a fortune.
too. Jack:
What are NFTs?
-Well... It’s the birth of a new economy, a new art form, and a new way of looking at the internet... It’s the birth of many things.
As Jack punctuated his sentence, they looked at me as if I were a merlin.
Tell me about it!
"This is art's bitcoin."
And what does this have to do with us?
You have a community that needs more motivation to support your turnaround. You have to offer them a game, real participation, and rewards like money...
But what is an NFT? I still don’t understand... It’s like little digital works of art.
Is that all there is to it? Jpegs?
"Jpegs that sell for hundreds of thousands of euros..." added Funk.
Yes, but these jpegs are part of what we call the blockchain.
What is this?
This is what made bitcoin possible. The principle is very simple. It is a system that uses the validation of a transfer by several servers. Thus, everything is recorded and public. These kinds of programmed public registers allow unique trade actions. From these exchanges came trust in one or more units of exchange. These units created decentralized economies. And that’s where everything changes. Decentralization... It’s an economy without central banks and exchanges without multi-millionaire fertilizers.
It’s mostly scams and money laundering. I bought some, and I don’t even know what I need it for!
Funk was one of the NFT wave's letdowns. I had to defend my steak.
No, it’s not a scam. There have been scams because it’s a new movement and based on speculation, but it’s anything but a scam. "To me, it’s a revolution."
At the word "revolution," I realized that I had made Jack tick.
-Good. Without going into the big theories, how can it be of use to us now?
Jeffrey Celavie's NFT series is created. It’s a bit like trading cards. NFTs usually trigger collector’s fever because their economy works like a piece of art that can be bought and resold quickly. And since, of course, some NFTs are worth more than others, it makes for a hyperactive market. This is what the creators of NFTs like Cryptopunks or Bored Apes do... You already have a following... So much for using it.
But here you are talking about creating a collection, and what does that have to do with street marketing?
Members can be motivated to participate spontaneously in street marketing. If they own Jeffrey’s NFTs, in addition to the artistic motivation, they will have the traditional art speculator motivation. The more noise the street marketing makes, the more valuable the NFT becomes, and the more valuable the NFT becomes, the more motivation the owner has to participate in the movement via street marketing.
An angel passed by.
-Okay. I’ll talk to Amer about it. It sounds like a good idea. I hope you’re geeky enough to set up your NFT system, because no one here dicks anything. Is that understood?
Yes, that’s understood. You can trust me.
I managed to give myself a little credibility for the morning. Jack invited me to check out Funk's workshop. Funk was a military man at heart, a military leader who applied Clementia, rule by gentleness. He was very quiet. Sleeping water. The workshop was very orderly. The color bombs were arranged in the open boxes of a large wall shelf. A sofa faced a large wooden table on trestles, woodworking equipment, and a station that played without
music, a fridge. A large white wooden board covered the back wall, and above it was the ventilation system. The rolled-up canvases were placed on the left and right of the shelves, depending on whether they were already painted or not. Everything was sorted out and classified. The traces of the painted canvases left marks on the board, giving it the appearance of an abstract painting. A projector came out of the ceiling. Pedro sent his productions directly to the projector. The team would project the image onto the canvas, and off it went! The canvas was painted in two hours, maximum. We weighted them down with clotheslines while they dried. No decoration, just a map of Paris pinned to cork and some tags. No smell of cigarette, nor of joint. A clean workshop for graffiti artists, in fact. The storage room on the left kept all the output material for when they went on assignment. Collage materials, printed sheets, stencils, roller skates, gloves, backpacks, crowbars, soldering irons, and tool boxes Funk brought out thin metal plates. They were cut out in the center in Jeffrey’s well-known patterns. This is our last test. We’re looking to make more efficient machines to do the graffiti faster, cheaper, and longer. Glued posters are expensive in the end; they wash out; the colors are ugly; and they are easily torn off. By making too many poster collages, we gave the impression of participating in an electoral campaign, and we like to work with spray paint to paint the walls.
Where are the others?
They are not working today. They are going on an outing tonight. I prepare the material for them. They will arrive with some friends who will help them at about 21:00.
Do you pay the buddies who help?
-Yeah. It’s important to have soldiers that we can hire when needed.
Do they have skates?
No, not this time. Here, look. This is how it works. We drew a handle on the side to go faster. It unlocks if needed. We, on the other hand, take the can. We apply the paint. We start with the yellow. We have a blue that is similar to cyan and a magenta that is similar to red. There are parts where the three colors come together for black. He gave me a demonstration.
«-It’s beautiful. It’s very clean and efficient.
-Yeah, thanks. Do you want to go tonight with the others with the others? We need someone to film.
-Why not.»
I went with Bomb and Cum. They were with two buddies, the ones I saw the first day at the workshop. We drank. We took the subway. We went to the thirteenth. They applied the stencils. I filmed. Their buddies were on the lookout. Their method was pretty good. Except for the smell of the bomb, everything was done very discreetly. It was an automatic painting—I would even say Taylorized. There was no need to think. We did a dozen of them and bought more beer cans to celebrate. That was it. We made tags on the way home. The concept was good. The graffiti artists were enjoying their evening and getting paid for it. It was like paying mercenaries who only live to kill.
The next day, I was going to take the video to the videographers. They would do a quick edit. The finished video would go to Jo, who would put it on the internet along with a little text. Blogs thirsty for clicks would just copy and paste it. Meanwhile, the graphic designer would finish the originals and send them to print for shipping. Lisa would put them on sale on the official website, and by Friday, the sales would start. It was magic. Jeffrey existed in the collective unconscious. I was working for Jeffrey. He was there like Renaud is there, like General Motors, Macdo, the CIA, and all those other things that don’t exist. There are groups that work, people that buy, colors that circulate, and ideas that stick to them.
At the beginning of the week, I went to my local library. I had to work in the privacy of my home. I went through Coca's files and picked up a few books on the subject. I had to have the main lines I also took pictures of the Nazi propaganda posters, Indian muralists, and Mexican posters. I went through it all with Pedro. He changed a lot of things, actually. He wanted to be efficient. We used an old key ring, a Coca-Cola edition in the shape of a Swastika, with the catchphrase "Private industries have never had to pay compensation for their political mistakes," and another Coca Group creation: Fanta. A poster was made of a bottle of Fanta drunk by its creator in his work suit: Max Keith in a Nazi suit. Fanta is a Nazi creation like Adidas, a small name for Adolf Dassler. It’s a real shame to think that we wear Dolfi in our cities. And there are so many other examples like that.
-Lol. Excellent.»
We printed a poster about the many esophageal cancers attributed to acidic drinking. We didn’t attack overweight. Too easy. We printed one of John Pemberton shooting up. The guy invented Coke to calm his heroin addiction, but it was all in the title. We passed on a Sudanese poster. Coca-Cola is made with gum arabic as an emulsifier rather than cola nuts. The binder is what keeps the water, sugar, and acid together. Otherwise, you would see the layers of chemicals appear after a few days. The problem was that gum arabic was imported from Sudan, a country that was supposed to be under US embargo for its sympathy with terrorist networks. a fictitious embargo, since Coca-Cola and Pepsi probably imported eighty percent of the total production. One might think that Coke and Pepsi were, after all, partly financing terrorism.
«Isn't that the gum arabic used in paints?» Besides the ink, the gum arabic is a very old product. It was a glue that the Egyptians used to adhere the strips of their mummies...
And we drink this...
-Well, yeah... It keeps the body clean.
There was a scandal about expired aspartame too, if I remember correctly... During the war in Afghanistan,
Yeah, aspartame, under intense heat, transforms into methanol, a toxic alcohol. But it is allowed by the C. But it’s approved by the EC, and there’s too much information and counter-information. It’s hard to put it in our posters.»
Pedro get for triads, complementary trichromes, avoiding primary colors, in a simple and clean style. The style had a tasteful, graphic avant-garde note.
I started my NFT dealer site. I was a solo artist. The NFT world already had very well-constructed codes that you couldn't help but notice. Investor confidence was based on the description of a road map, which was a kind of simplified business plan. Since NFTs were based on speculation, they were based on investment and, by default, on trust due to a concise and honest explanation of the project. So I announced a collection of two thousand small images that would soon be available to fans. I drew classic NFTs, PFPs, and small portraits that declined according to a generative art program. Generative art is a program that delves into the particularities of the portrait through combinations of different features. In my case, I drew a portrait of a manga-style woman with different and more or less rare eyes, clothes, haircuts, and eyebrows according to the random sorting of the program. That was how it was done in the NFT world. If the green-eyed portraits were rarer than the others, like panini cards, they would be more valuable in future resale markets. It might be funny, but NFT was still in its infancy, and rare tones could fetch hundreds of thousands of dollars. Now we’re not laughing so hard. That’s why it was called PFP (profile file picture). Because after that, the owner could display his jpeg as a profile picture—a luxurious profile picture that could be displayed like a Ferrari or a yacht. If we could pay graffiti artists to make some posters, we could also build a kind of lottery that invited an audience to go into the streets to draw the logos of their favorite artists' revolts. The manga portraits were dressed up with retro posters, Jeffrey’s round glasses, and his round, cursive signature, so there was no doubt it was her. This was Jeff’s new work. Jo would soon encourage fans to log on to jeffreycelavie.team with an access code. The access code would be obtained under one condition: send in photos of an act of vandalism against a public appearance by Coke. Any advertisement or public distribution channel had to be signed with Jeffrey Celavie’s glasses and tag. All you had to do was post the photo on the Discord newsgroup. With this proof of good faith in a targeted act of vandalism, the fan would receive his or her unique collectible NFT. I wrote in my little black notebook, dubious about its usefulness, but as I saw that everyone was taking it to heart, I imitated them. I didn’t think it was possible to make a more acidic campaign. Amer decided otherwise. I had to add a little cherry to the cake. The next day I had a note:
 
 
Hi Domi.
 
 
not bad, but something is missing. I really like your construction. It’s good. It goes fast. But it lacks a punch, an act that makes the press want to stir. You should take down the Swastika-shaped Coke poster and paint it bigger in a very conspicuous spot. In front of the Georges Pompidou Center, there are very sturdy buildings with roads separating them. Go make your cross on one of them. The operation will be done on Thursday evening, and we will be able to take the photos for the weekend. People read the articles on Friday. Go do some scouting. Go paint it with funk.
 
 
Amer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
